Hello and welcome.
Let's understand the basic terminologies used in the life insurance industry.
part 1
1. Minimum Age at Entry
Minimum age at entry refers to the lowest age at which a person can buy a particular LIC policy.
In simpler terms, it tells us the youngest age at which someone can become a policy holder.
Each LIC plan has a specific minimum age requirement depending on the policy type and risk involved.
For example, a child plan may allow entry as early as 0 years, but while a pension plan might require the person to be at least 18 years old.
Real-world example, suppose Raj and Priya have just had a baby named Arab.
They want to secure his future by investing in a child plan.
LIC's new children's money back plan allows entry for children as young as 0 years.
So, they can immediately purchase a policy in Arab's name.
Now consider a young man named Rohan, who just turned 17 and wants to start saving early.
He wants to invest in an endowment plan.
However, the minimum age for that plan is 18.
In this case, he will need to wait until his 18th birthday to become eligible.
The rationale behind setting a minimum age is to ensure that the policy holder is of a certain age where insurability is meaningful,
and in some cases, where consent and legal standing, like majority age, is important.
2. Maximum age at entry
Maximum age at entry is the highest age at which a person can apply for a particular life insurance plan.
It is determined based on the risk appetite of the insurance company and the duration of the policy.
LIC defines this limit to ensure that the person has a reasonable chance of surviving the policy term,
thereby balancing risk and benefit.
Real-world example, let's take the example of Mr. Sharma, who is 60 years old and is looking to buy an endowment policy.
If the LIC plan he wants to buy has a maximum age at entry of 55, he won't be eligible.
However, LIC offers certain pension plans or term insurance plans where the maximum entry age can go up to 65 or even 75 in some cases.
This restriction protects both the policy holder and the insurer.
Older individuals typically pose a higher health risk, so insurers limit entry to ensure the policy remains viable.
3. Minimum sum assured
Minimum sum assured is the least amount of money that LIC will pay to the nominee or policy holder in the event of death or policy maturity.
This is the base coverage amount promised in the insurance contract.
Each plan defines this minimum limit to make sure the cover is meaningful and justifies the administrative and underwriting costs.
Real-world example, imagine Neha wants to buy a term insurance plan from LIC.
The plan she is interested in has a minimum sum assured off to lakhs rupees.
This means she cannot purchase that plan for a lower coverage amount like one lakh rupees.
She must opt for at least to lakhs rupees.
The purpose of setting a minimum sum assured is to ensure the benefit amount is sufficient for the needs it is intended to cover, such as education, marriage or death clearance.
4. Maximum sum assured
Maximum sum assured is the highest life cover or insurance benefit one can take under a particular policy.
Some LIC plans do not have a maximum limit and allow the sum assured based on underwriting and financial capacity of the insured.
Real-world example, say a businessman named Mr. Agraval wants to buy a term insurance policy to cover his business liabilities worth one crore rupees.
LIC's tech term plan allows him to choose any sum assured starting from 50 lakhs rupees with no upper cap subject to income proof.
Hence, if Mr. Agraval can justify his income and financial needs, he can get a cover of one crore rupees or more.
High sum assured policies are beneficial for individuals with high financial responsibilities.
However, they undergo strict underwriting including medical checks and financial documentation.
5. Minimum policy term
The policy term is the duration for which the policy will remain in force.
The minimum policy term is the shortest period for which one can buy a particular LIC policy. It varies from plan to plan.
Real-world example, suppose Priya wants a short term savings plan.
She chooses a money back policy from LIC which has a minimum term of 20 years.
If she is looking for something shorter, she might consider LIC's term plan with a 10 year term.
Short policy terms are useful when the policy holder has specific short term goals such as a child's marriage in 10 years or retirement in a few years.
6. Maximum policy term
Maximum policy term is the longest duration for which a particular policy can remain active.
This limit ensures that the policy doesn't extend beyond a practical age for maturity or risk coverage.
Real-world example, let's consider a 25 year old named Suresh who wants long term life coverage.
He selects LIC's Given Lab plan which allows a maximum policy term of 25 years.
So, if he opts for the full term, his policy will mature when he turns 50.
Some policies, like term plans, offer terms up to 40 years depending on the entry age.
The longer the term, the higher the risk for LIC, which is why they have limits.
It also aligns with human life expectancy and practical planning needs.
7. Minimum age at maturity
Minimum age at maturity is the lowest age at which the policy holder can receive maturity benefits.
This ensures that the maturity payout happens only when the insured reaches a certain responsible or legally adult age.
Real-world example, let's say are of parents bought a child plan when he was a newborn.
The minimum maturity age under the plan is 18 years.
So, even though they bought it at age 0, the earliest the benefits will be paid is when are of turns 18.
This is typically aligned with age of adulthood or when financial responsibilities begin.
This condition ensures that the insured has the legal capacity to handle the funds.
8. Maximum age at maturity
Maximum age at maturity is the oldest age at which a policy holder can receive the benefits under a policy.
LIC sets this age to ensure practical viability, usually aligning with life expectancy.
Real-world example, suppose Mr Kapoor, aged 50, wants to invest in a 30-year term plan.
This means the policy will mature when he turns 80.
If the plan has a maximum maturity age of 75, he won't be eligible for a 30-year term.
Instead, he might need to opt for a shorter term like 25 years.
This rule ensures that policies don't stretch beyond realistic human life spends.
9. Premium Paying Term PPT
Premium paying term PPT refers to the number of years the policy holder has to pay premiums.
It can be equal to over less than the policy term.
Real-world example, SEMA buys a 20-year LIC policy but opts for a limited premium paying term of 10 years.
This means she only needs to pay premiums for the first 10 years while the policy coverage continues for 20 years.
This feature is useful for people who expect their income to reduce later in life or want to finish paying early.
10. ADDB RIDER
Accidental death and disability benefit rider
ADDB rider provides an additional sum assured in case the life in short dies or becomes permanently disabled due to an accident.
It's an optional rider that can be attached to many base LIC plans.
Real-world example, imagine Rohit buys a policy with a base sum assured of 10 lakhs rupees and adds an ADDB rider for another 10 lakhs rupees.
If he dies in an accident, his family will receive 20 lakhs rupees base plus ADDB.
If he becomes permanently disabled, he may get the ADDB benefit in installments.
This rider offers enhanced protection in unforeseen and unfortunate events especially useful for individuals in high-risk professions or frequent travelers.
11. Accident Rider
The accident rider provides an additional payout if the policy holder suffers death or sometimes specific injuries due to an accident.
While similar to ADDB, this may be more limited in some policies.
Real-world example
If Mina has a life insurance policy with an accident rider and she dies in a road accident, her nominee will receive the base sum assured plus the accident rider benefit.
This financial support can help the family cope with sudden losses.
12. TURN INSURANCE RIDER
Term rider is an add-on that allows the policy holder to enhance the sum assured for a limited term within the base policy.
It is usually cheaper than buying a separate term policy.
Real-world example, Amit has a policy of 10 lakhs rupees but adds a term rider of 15 lakhs rupees for 20 years.
If he passes away within 20 years, his nominee gets 25 lakhs rupees.
After 20 years, the rider ends and only base cover remains.
13. Premium waiver benefit, PWB
PWB ensures that if the premium pair, usually parent or proposer, dies or becomes disabled, all future premiums are waived and the policy continues as normal.
Real-world example, Raj buys a child plan for his son with PWB.
Unfortunately, Raj dies in an accident.
Because of PWB, all future premiums are waived but the policy continues and his son will receive all maturity benefits.
14. Critical Illness rider
This rider offers a lump sum payout if the insured is diagnosed with a listed critical illness such as cancer, heart attack or kidney failure.
Real-world example, if Shreya has a critical illness rider and is diagnosed with cancer, she will receive the rider some assured.
This helps cover expensive treatments or compensate for income loss.
15. Maturity
Maturity refers to the date when the policy term ends and the insured receives the maturity amount including bonuses if applicable.
Real-world example, Ravi took a 20 year endowment policy.
After paying premiums for 20 years, the policy matures and he receives 5 lakhs rupees as maturity benefit.
This helps fulfill his retirement or child education goals.
16. Death Benefit
The death benefit is the amount paid to the nominee if the insured person dies during the policy term.
This may include the sum assured, accrued bonuses and any additional rider benefits depending on the plan.
Real-world example, Manoj had a sum assured of 10 lakhs rupees and had accumulated bonuses of 3 lakhs rupees.
Upon his death, his wife, the nominee received 13 lakhs rupees as the death benefit.
This financial support helped her manage household expenses and children's education.
17. Nominee
A nominee is the person chosen by the policy holder to receive the benefits in case of the police holder's demise.
A nominee can be a family member, child, spouse or even a trust.
Real-world example, Rita took a life insurance policy and nominated her son Rohan as the nominee.
In case of her unfortunate demise, LIC will pay the policy benefits directly to Rohan without any legal complications.
18. Assigning
An assignee is a person or institution to whom the rights of the policy are legally transferred.
This usually happens when the policy is used as collateral for a loan or as part of a legal settlement.
Real-world example, Ramesh needed a loan and pledged his LIC policy to the bank.
He assigned the policy to the bank.
If Ramesh fails to repay the loan, the bank can claim the policy proceeds up to the outstanding loan amount.
19. Premium
Premium is the amount paid by the policy holder to the insurance company at regular intervals monthly, quarterly, half yearly or yearly to keep the policy active.
Real-world example, Neha pays 12,000 rupees per year towards her LIC endowment plan.
This amount is her annual premium.
If she doesn't pay this, the policy may lapse.
20. Grace Period
Grace Period is the extra time given after the premium due date during which the policy holder can still pay the premium without losing policy benefits.
For most LIC policies, it's 30 days for yearly, half yearly, quarterly modes and 15 days for monthly mode.
Real-world example, amidst premium due date was 10th March, but he forgot.
He paid it on 5th April.
Since he paid within the 30-day Grace Period, his policy remained active without penalty.
21. Look in Period
The look in or free look period is typically 15 days, 30 days for online policies.
From the date of receiving the policy document, during which the policy holder can cancel the policy if not satisfied.
Real-world example, Priya bought a policy online but changed her mind after reading the terms.
She cancelled it within 30 days and received her premium back, minus minimal charges.
22. LIC policies offer a loan facility after a certain period, usually 2-3 years, using the policy's surrender value as collateral.
Real-world example, Ravi needed funds for his daughter's wedding.
He took her to lack rupees loan against his endowment policy from LIC.
The interest was lower than a personal loan and the policy continued.
23. Lapse of Policy
A policy lapses if the premium is not paid even within the Grace Period.
Once lapsed, the policy holder loses the insurance coverage and benefits unless revived.
Real-world example, Rohit forgot to pay premiums for 2 years and missed the Grace Periods.
His policy lapsed. He had to revive it later with penalty and interest.
24. Mode of payment
It refers to how often premiums are paid.
LIC allows modes like monthly, quarterly, half yearly and yearly.
Real-world example, Sunita chose monthly payment mode through ECS.
1000 rupees gets auto-dabitted every month, making it easier for her to manage compared to Lumps and yearly payments.
25. Survival Benefit
Survival Benefit is a periodic payment made to the policy holder during the policy term provided they are alive.
Common in money back plans
Real-world example, in LIC's money back plan, Anuj received 20% of the sum assured at the end of the 5th, 10th and 15th year.
At maturity, he got the rest along with bonuses.
26. Loyalty Addition
What is it? Loyalty Addition
La is a type of non-guaranteed bonus declared by LIC for certain plans that have completed a minimum number of years.
It is paid only once at the time of maturity or death and is a reward for staying invested in the policy for a longer duration.
Real-world example
Suppose Rohan has a 20 year endowment policy with LIC and LIC declares a loyalty addition of 40 rupee per 1000 rupees some assured for policies that complete 20 years.
If Rohan's sum assured is 5 lakhs rupees, his law will be.
40 rupees times 5 lakhs rupees 1000 is equal to 20 thousand rupees.
So, when his policy matchers, he will get 20 thousand rupees as a loyalty reward in addition to the sum assured and other bonuses.
27. Guaranteed Addition
What is it? Guaranteed Additions are fixed bonuses declared in advance by LIC in select plans.
Unlike Reversionary or Loyalty bonuses, Gaz are assured and mentioned in the plan brochure itself.
Real-world example
Say Nina buys a policy that gives a guaranteed addition of 50 rupee per 1000 rupees some assured for the first 5 years.
Her sum assured is 4 lakhs rupees. So, she will get.
50 rupees times 4 lakhs rupees 1000 times 5 is equal to 1 lakh rupees.
This amount is guaranteed and added to the maturity death benefit.
28. Next Last Near Birthday
What is it? In LIC policies, your age is used for premium calculation but how its calculated depends on whether the plan uses last birthday,
next birthday or nearest birthday. Last birthday, your age as of your last birthday.
Next birthday, your age on your upcoming birthday.
nearest birthday, the age you are closest to.
If your half birthday has passed, LIC may count your next birthday.
Real-world example
If today is 30th July and your birthday is 1st August and you are 29 now.
Last Birthday is equal to 29.
Next Birthday is equal to 30.
nearest birthday is equal to 30 because your birthday is just 2 days away.
LIC often uses nearest birthday for most plans.
29 Proposal Forms, 300, 340, 360
What is it?
LIC uses different proposal forms based on the type of insurance plan.
Form 300 used for regular life insurance proposals like endowment whole life.
Form 340 used for proposals under children's plans like Jeevan Tarun.
Form 360 used for proposals under health insurance policies.
Real-world example
If Raj wants to buy a standard LIC endowment policy, he will fill out proposal form 300.
But if he wants to buy a child plan for his son, he will be asked to use Form 340.
Similarly, for health specific plans like Jeevan Aroga, Form 360 is used.
30 GST, GST rates on LIC policies.
Term insurance 18% on full premium.
ULIT Unit linked insurance plans 18% on mortality and fund management charges.
Traditional plans, endowment, money back etc.
4.5% in 1st year to 0.25% in subsequent years.
Calculated only on the risk premium component, not total premium.
Single premium annuity plans 1.8% concessional rate.
Health insurance riders 18% on full premium, PWB, ADDB, term rider etc.
Memo note, GST is not applied on the sum assured or maturity amount, only on the premium being paid.
Counter-clockwise arrows example to understand.
Let's say, your early premium is equal to 10,000 rupees.
It is an endowment policy, traditional plan.
Year 1 GST is equal to 4.5% 10,000 rupees times 4.5% is equal to 450 rupees.
From year to onward, GST is equal to 0.25% 10,000 rupees times 2.25% is equal to 225 rupees.
So, you will pay.
Year 1 total premium is equal to 10,450 rupees.
From year to onward is equal to 10,225 rupees.
Busts in silhouette who pays the GST.
The policy holder, you, pays the GST.
It is included in the premium amount shown in receipts or premium notices.
Always check whether the GST is included in the premium breakdown.
Is GST refundable?
No, for individual policy holders, GST paid is not refundable or climbable.
However, corporate buyers for key-man insurance, for example, may claim input tax credit as per their business accounting.
Right-pointing magnifying glass is GST applicable on loan or surrender?
No.
GST is not applicable on the loan taken against a policy or on the surrender value paid to the policy holder.
31 relationship between parameters
Let's explore the interrelationship between the following life insurance parameters one by one by picking every possible combination of the six variables.
Some are short, some.
Policy turn.
Age.
Premium.
Riders.
Premium paying term, ppt.
GST.
White heavy check mark 1.
Some are short and premium.
Relationship, when the some are short increases, the premium increases.
Explanation, some are short is the guaranteed amount payable on death or maturity.
Naturally, higher coverage means higher financial risk for the insurer, hence they charge a higher premium.
Example, for a 30-year-old buying a term plan for 20 years.
Certain lakh rupees annual premium 3,000 rupees.
Certain lakh rupees annual premium 5,500 rupees.
White heavy check mark 2.
Some are short and policy term.
Relationship as policy term increases, the total risk exposure time increases, so the overall premium and sometimes underwriting is higher.
Explanation, longer policy term is equal to insurer at risk for a longer period is equal to higher cost.
Example.
Certain lakh rupees for 10 years.
Low premium.
Certain lakh rupees for 30 years higher premium.
White heavy check mark 3.
Some are short and age.
Relationship, higher the age, higher the premium for the same size.
Explanation, 825-year-old is less risky than a 50-year-old, so the same size costs more at older ages.
Example.
Certain lakh rupees at age 25 premium 3,000 rupees.
Certain lakh rupees at age 50 premium 10,000 rupees.
White heavy check mark 4.
Some are short and riders.
Relationship riders are add-ons to the base some are short and they attract extra premium.
Explanation, adding riders increases the total protection, so premium increases.
Example.
With a 10 lakh rupees start.
No rider 5,000 rupees.
With ADDB plus term rider 6,500 rupees.
White heavy check mark 5.
Some are short and PPT.
Relationship lower PPT is equal to higher annual premium, but longer PPT is equal to smaller annual installments.
Explanation, if you spread the payment over more years, each installment is smaller.
Example.
Certain lakh rupees.
PPT 10 years, 6000 rupees per year.
PPT 5 years, 11,000 rupees per year.
White heavy check mark 6.
Some are short and GST.
Relationship GST is a percentage of the premium not SA.
Explanation.
The more the SA, the more the premium, so GST amount increases.
Example.
Premium 10,000 rupees GST.
4.5% first year is equal to 450 rupees.
Premium 20,000 rupees GST is equal to 900 rupees.
White heavy check mark 7.
Policy turn and premium.
Relationship longer the turn, higher the total premium, not necessarily per year.
Explanation, even if per year premium is lower, you pay it for more years.
Example.
10,000 rupees per year, for 10 years, is equal to 1 lakh rupees.
7,000 rupees per year, for 20 years, is equal to 1 lakh 40,000 rupees.
White heavy check mark.